Bullshit-Free Statistics: An introduction for the skeptical, the
pessimistic, and the mildly disturbed.


Most introductory texts on stats suck, especially those of the "Stats
for X" variey, where X = Biologists, Economists, Social Scientists,
etc.

This doc, which will probably never be finished, is intended as an
intro to stats that doesn't suck.

These days it is common for writers to answer "What is Statistics" by
saying something along the lines of "data analysis."  This is not so
much false as vacuous.  Unless you already have a pretty good idea of
what stats is, it tells you nothing at best and suggests something
mysterious at worst.

A better answer refers to the etymology of the term and says that
stats is the use of mathematics to characterize states of affairs.
But this too is weak, because it is misleading.  It suggests that
statistics describe facts, ways that the world is.  But that is
generally not the case.

Statistics is the device we use to try to discover or construct order
from disorder.  Note the contrast with other mathematical disciplines,
which begin with order.  Geometry studies the properties of various
kinds of spaces; algebra studies the properties of various kinds of
mathematical structure; and so on.  In each case, the phenomena are
already orderly.  That is no the case in statistics.  It studies the
properties of sets of numbers (more generally, mathematical entities)
whose order is unknown.  A set of random numbers is disordered by
definition; nonetheless, we can compute its aritmetic mean, standard
deviation, etc.

[Compare the calculus.  It's one thing to learn the "rules of the
(mathematical) game", it's another to see how the equations of
calculus describe facts in the world.  It requires that we invent some
new empirical concepts (or intuitions), e.g. "instantaneous rate of
change" - does it "really" exist?  In this case too, as in every case
of applied mathematics, we have to ascend and descend the semantic
ladder.  This becomes critically important when we try to apply
statistics in the human sciences (psychology, sociology, etc).  In the
physical sciences, semantic ascent is presumed to be "free" - it costs
us nothing, doesn't "lose the phenomenon". etc.  That presumption is
not automatically available when the data involve the human world of
beliefs, desires, concepts, attitudes, rituals, institutions, etc.
The difference ultimately lies in the difference between the natural
"space of laws" and the cultural "space of reasons".  The data of the
natural sciences live in the former space, those of the human sciences
in the latter.]

The Semantic Ladder

That's the purely mathematical perspective.  Applied statistics uses
mathematical statistics to discover or construct order from
empirically derived \textit{data}.  Note that "data" is not a neutral
term -- it does not mean merely "numbers".  But statistics
\textit{treats} empirical data as purely mathematical "data" -
numbers.  Researchers then interpret the deliverances of statistical
analysis in empirical terms.  So applied statistics involves moving up
and down the semantic ladder - we start by moving up, from the
empirical to the mathematical, compute our statitics, and then move
back down the ladder from mathematics to the empirical.


Example: are averages "real"?

Consider the example of the arithmetic mean.  To say that the average
family has 2.3 children, on this view, is to state a fact, to say
something about the state of the world (or at least the population of
families).  But a little reflection shows that this cannot be.  No
family in the world ever had 2.3 children.  So a sentence like "the
average family has 2.3 children" cannot be referring to a fact about
any real family; the question then is whether it refers to any fact at
all.  And the answer is no.  There is nothing in the world, no fact of
the matter about the population of families, that corresponds to "2.3
children".  The average, "2.3", is a purely mathematical construction,
and mathematical facts are not empirical facts.  The the claim that
the average family has 2.3 children cannot be treated as an empirical
claim; instead, it is a claim about a mathematical abstraction.

[Alternative: treat the arithmetic mean as a ratio.  E.g. two baskets
of apples, one with two, the other with three.  The mean is 2.5; but
2.5 of what?  Of apples per basket.  But again "2.5 apples per basket"
does not refer to anything in the real world.  Etc.  So one way is to
talk about "the average basket", which doesn't exist; the other way is
to talk about a ratio of apples to baskets, as a kind of
generalization, which also does not exist.]


But this is counter-intuitive; surely the idea that we can average
over family sizes is unobjectionable.  We know what "family of 2.3
children" means, even it it doesn't refer to a "real" family.  Even if
"2.3 children" is a mathematical abstraction, surely it corresponds
(somehow) to a matter of fact about the population of families.  How
can we explain this?

I think the way to proceed is to treat claims about averages as
counterfactuals.  The claim that "the average family has 2.3 children"
looks like an ordinary factual claim, but in fact it is a
counterfactual claim.  The real claim is that:

    IF every family in the population made the same contribution to
    the total number of children, THEN each family would have 2.3
    children.

This is the intuitive meaning of the formula for the arithmetic mean.
The arithmetic mean of a set of numbers does not express a fact about
that set; instead it expresses what the set would have to be like if
it were uniform, if every element made the same contribution to the
sum.


Stats intros always explain the notion of the mean, but they virtually
never point out its fundamental irreality.  They also rarely if ever
point out the historical significance of the invention of "the Average
Man".  He is so common and ordinary today that it is easy to overlook
the fact that he is a 19th century invention who does not in fact
exist, and would have completely flummoxed people of previous
centuries.


To get back to the original question "What is statistics", this
suggests that stats should be characterized as the use of mathematics
to explore alternative /possible/ states of affairs, or something
along those lines.  Two points are critical: 1) "states of affairs",
because statistical functions on sets of numbers do in some sense tell
us something about the "state" of those sets; but 2) those
(mathematical) states should not be mistaken for empirical matters of
fact; they should be treated as possible ways the world might be, not
the way the world in fact is.

================

Evolution & Statistics

[Epigraph:  "The police are not here to create disorder.  They are here to preserve disorder." - Mayor Daley I]

The theory of evolution seeks to explain how order can arise from disorder.

Statistics seeks to discovery order in disorder.  Alternatively, it
seeks to construct order from disorder.  These perspectives implicate
radically different ways of looking at the world and our relation to
it.  The realist perspective postulates a reality behind appearances,
and seeks to discover hidden realities.  The regression line
discovered by statistical analysis is really there.  It may be hidden
behind appearances, but it is hidden \textit{reality}.  The
constructivist perspective builds descriptions from appearances but
(generally speaking) denies the reality-appearance dichotomy.  The
regression line yielded by statistical computation describes an order
in the disorderly data from which it is constructed, but the
constructivist does not take it to be a description of an independent
reality behind appearances.  It is a reality of the same order as the
data, but one that we construct and project.

Support for the constructivist view comes from the fact that variant
interpretations are always possible, and there is no
perspective-independent standpoint from which we can decide which
"discovered" order is nature's own order - the One True Order behind
appearances.  This is true even of the simplest statistics.  Take for
example the arithmetic mean.  There are at least two distinct
counterfactual ways to interpret the mean of a set of numbers.  One is
ask what \textit{would} be the case if each element of the set were to
have the same value.  In that case, the mean \textit{would} be the the
value each element of the set \textit{would} take, in that
counterfactual situation.  The other way is interpret the mean as
connected to what \textit{would} be the case if the elements of the
set were to form an arithmetic progression from the minimum to the
maximum value.  In that counterfactual situation, the mean
\textit{would be} the midpoint of the straight line connecting the
minimum to the maximum.  There is no principled way to decide that one
of these perspectives is "the correct" one.
